Here's How to Watch the Great American Solar Eclipse Live



	One of the most anticipated celestial events in recent history is just around the corner: On Monday (Aug. 21), the Great American Solar Eclipse will cast a fascinating darkness over the aptly named "path of totality" that stretches from Oregon to South Carolina, obscuring the sun's light as the moon passes between Earth and its closest star.

	If you're not one of the 12 million people who live within the approximately 70-mile-wide (113 kilometers) path of totality, or one of the 1.85 million to 7.4 million people expected to travel to that path, there are still ways to watch the eclipse live. [Total Solar Eclipse 2017: Everything You Need to Know]

NASA will host two live streams: One will follow the eclipse across the U.S.; the other will broadcast from Carbondale, Illinois, a spot that will be in the path of totality for the 2017 eclipse and also the 2024 eclipse.  

	You can also check the Live Science website and follow @LiveScience on Twitter for photos and around-the-clock coverage of the total solar eclipse. 

	NASA's Eclipse Across America livestream will last from 12 p.m. to 4 p.m. EDT. This video will offer fantastic views from 12 locations, including from airplanes, ground telescopes and 57 high-altitude balloons.

	To get another perspective, you can view NASA's Live from Carbondale livestream, which lasts from 11:45 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. EDT. Once you tune in, you will be able to watch live coverage of the eclipse, interviews with scientists, telescope feeds and educational activities; you can also participate in social media chats.

	  

	For anyone hoping to see the total eclipse or a partial eclipse in person, it may help to know when the celestial event will arrive in your neck of the woods. Here are local mideclipse times for some of the major cities along the path of totality, according to Eclipse2017.org. If your town isn't listed, you can use NASA's interactive map to check it yourself.
